---
layout: post
title: True Crime: A Guilty Plea-sure
---


### Catching Some Killers to Catch Some Zzzs

I have had insomnia since high school. The harder I try to sleep, the more sleep eludes me. In college, however, I found my miracle cure: documentaries. It could be about almost anything. I even bought wireless headphones and slept with my phone plugged in so that I could be continuously lulled into a deep, nearly comatose sleep. One night, I had been trying to fall asleep for almost six hours. I put on a docuseries episode about Billy Ray Cyrus's stay in a haunted hotel, and I was alseep in under five minutes. Did this disturb my undergraduate roommate? Yes, definitely, but Billy's voice soothed by achy breaky heart and my achy wakey brain. It turns out that there is such thing as too much of a good thing because my strange addiction bled over into my waking hours (*My Strange Addiction* is a great show to fall sleep to, by the way). Anything that wasn't a documentary simply didn't feel real enough. Does this mean that I also started enjoying mind-numbing reality TV like *Naked and Afraid*? Unfortunately, yes. One day, Netflix recommended the old *Forensic Files* to me, which is a classic and a cult favorite. My father introduced me to true crime as a young child (probably too young), but *Forensic Files* was popular well before my time. What did I discover? Crime solving used to be so primitive! It's almost difficult to watch!

In the age of smart phones and social media, information is monitored more closely than ever. Every time I so much as google "shoes," I'm seeing ads for shoes on every social media platform for months afterwards. If you search for enough incriminating things, there is probably a National Security Agency agent in a black suit and sunglasses looking through a manila folder with your name on it as we speak. Maybe not, but that's how it feels. Pictures, texts, posts, emails, and more detail out your entire life in scary detail. If investigators in the 20th century had access to the kind of tabs tech companies keep on people now, there probably wouldn't be any cold cases left to solve. 

Today, it seems pretty standard for phone records and texts to be used against criminals in court cases, but where does that information go? After a case, that information seems to lose its intrinsic value. It solved one case, but I think it could also help solve many others. It's just one data point in a disturbing trend, and data shouldn't just disappear into a judiciary vacuum. It should be passed along to those who know what to do with it.

### Netflix and Kill

Recently, Netflix has been releasing hit after hit to the quarantine-crazed mob. The unusual circumstances surroudning the films' releases have turned films and shows that would normally just be any run-of-the-mill Netflix production into international sensations. Take *Tiger King*, for example. A documentary about the exploitation of big cats in American backyard zoos became a pop culture phenomenon. Despite his televised fall from grace, the documentary's star, Joe Exotic, became some sort of jailhouse "America's sweetheart." People walk around wearing Joe Exotic face masks, Joe became the subject of countless memes, and the "antagonist" of the show, Carole Baskin, was recently made a cast member of *Dancing With the Stars*. Consumers are starving for content, and it is into this content famine that *American Murder: The Family Next Door* was born.

Although not quite as quirky or flashy as other Netflix documentaries, like *Tiger King* or *Don't F\*\*k With Cats: Hunting an Internet Killer*, *American Murder: The Family Next Door* investigates a case very fresh in America's cultural memory. What makes this documentary different from most other crime documentaries is that *American Murder: The Family Next Door* is solely archival in its probing. Most true crime documentaries include some real life footage, but depend upon confessional style interviews and dramatic reenactments. For example, Netflix's *Amanda Knox* tells the story of Knox's imprisonment through interviews with Knox, her boyfriend, and the Italian officials who tried to have them thrown behind bars, but the producers threw in the occasional raw crime scene footage clip or Italian newspaper headline. *American Murder: The Family Next Door* is the opposite, hitting viewers with texts, Facebook posts, and police footage in rapid succession, not even bothering to include interviews from witnesses. Shanann's family, who supplied Shanann's personal social media posts and text messages, were not included at all in the documentary. Instead of telling you what happened to Shanann and her daughters, *American Murder: The Family Next Door* puts together all of the archival puzzle pieces and shows you.

In crime investigation shows like *NCIS* and *Law and Order: Special Victims Unit*, the killer is hardly ever the first or most obvious suspect. In fact, the team usually spends most of the episode doggedly pursuing a more obvious suspect, only to discover the true culprit in the last five or ten minutes. Watch any documentary-style true crime show, however, and the experts on the show will say that the killer is almost always the most obvious suspect. Spouses, significant others, friends, and family are grilled by law enforcement long before other possibilities are even brought into play. In real life, the mystery and intrigue of crime cases often fall victim to Ockham's razor: the simple answer is usually the correct one.

So what happened with Chris Watts in 2018?

### Crocodile Tear Chris

In 2018, a pregnant Shanann Watts and her two young daughters went missing. Upon arrival at the family home, officers immediately set their sights on Shanann's husband, Chris. Chris walked them through the house, established a timeline for Shanann and the girls' disappearance, and answered the officers' questions. He even released several pleas on news stations for the safe return of his wife and daughters, during which he seemed calm and determined. His demeanor cleared him of any guilt in some people's eyes, but those more attuned to body language cues received the opposite message. To many people who saw these videos of Chris, his body langauge was just *wrong*. Even if he was in a state of total shock, it seemed unusual that a man, a husband and father, would not shed a single tear for his missing family. In fact, one of his neighbors who provided security camera footage immediately pegged his behavior as unusual, but a police officer on the scene came to Chris's defense. Many people lined up behind the neighbor and officer to either condemn or defend Chris, and some still defend him to this day. 

Ultimately, the debate over Chris's supposed innocence didn't matter at all. Investigators called him in for a polygraph exam, and he failed catastrophically. After flinging accusations at Shanann for their daughters' deaths, Chris came clean about everything. He was having an affair (little did he know his mistress, Nichol, had already willingly come forward to alert police to the affair, cracking the case wide open). He killed Shanann. He killed their daughters. He hid their bodies. He felt no remorse because he could begin his new life with his mistress. This last confession was certainly not a great way to win over the sympathies of those deciding on his punishment.

### \#Selfie

While the polygraph exposed his crime, his girlfriend's confession revealed his motive. Her statement was corroborated by the contents of Chris's phone, on which investigators found picture after video after picture of Chris's blossoming romance with Nichol. All those selfies probably didn't help his case very much. Paired with the texts between Shanann and her friend about how Chris had become very distant, the entire picture became crystal clear. In one phone, we see Shanann's documentation of her marriage falling apart, and in the other phone, we see Chris's documentation of his affair with Nichol. Put them together, and you've got a strong case against Chris Watts. Throw in all of Shanann's social media posts and crime footage, and you've got an archive detailing a crime from conception to conviction.

For many years now, criminologists, psycyhologists, sociologists, and other experts from various fields have been trying to unravel the mysteries behind human behavior, specifically negative ones. Instead of trying to code the entire human genome, these scientists have focused their efforts into coding human crime patterns. Why do people do the things they do? What is the pattern?

*American Murder: The Family Next Door*, although the first purely archival crime documentary I've seen, is not the first to take the killer's perspective into consideration. The docuseries *I Am a Killer* relies on confessional interviews from inmates on death row. Despite not being as thorough or indusputable, documentaries like these do offer data on crime and motive, just like *American Murder: The Family Next Door*. Every time new data points are added into the mix, new trends strengthen, weaken, develop. Or, at least, that's the way I see it. Traditionally speaking, though, what is crime data?

### Data???

Although I am of the opinion that any available information is data, I am hardly considered an expert on the subject. So, to answer the question of what is considered data, let's turn to an actual expert. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Crime Data Explorer, crimes appear to be categorized based on filed reports. It says, 
> "Crime data for the nation are derived from summary (SRS)  glossary lookup and incident (NIBRS)  glossary lookup reports voluntarily submitted to the FBI.

> In 2019, the FBI estimated  glossary lookup crime statistics for the nation are based on data received from 14,993 of 18,671 law enforcement agencies in the country that year" ([FBI Crime Data Explorer](https://crime-data-explorer.fr.cloud.gov/explorer/national/united-states/crime)).

No offense to the FBI, but I could see how this could exclude other potentially useful kinds of data. 

In addition to actual filed police reports, self report surveys are often a good tool to decide whether or not the number of official reports is accurate or not. In "The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves" from *Data Feminism* by Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren Klein, surveys revealed a major issue with relying solely upon the number of reports filed. It says,
> After comparing the Clery Act data with anonymous campus climate surveys... consulting with experts, and interviewing survivors, they discovered, paradoxically, that the truth was closer to the reverse of the picture that the Clery Act data suggest. Many of the colleges with higher reported rates of sexual assault were actually places where more institutional resources were being devoted to support for survivors" ([The Numbers Don't Speak for Themselves](https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/czq9dfs5/release/2)).

While it is easier to think that this discrepancy is accidental, D'Ignazio and Klein point out that it is often intentional or even culturally reinfoced. They say,
> "But the numbers are self-reported, and there are also strong financial incentives for colleges not to report. No college wants to tell the government—let alone parents of prospective students—that it has a high rate of sexual assault on campus. This is compounded by the fact that survivors of sexual assault often do not want to come forward—because of social stigma, the trauma of reliving their experience, or the resulting lack of social and psychological support" ([The Numbers Don't Speak for Themselves](https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/czq9dfs5/release/2)). 

Even self reporting is flawed. Despite being anonymous, many people simply don't want to answer surveys truthfully. How many high schoolers do you think answer a survey saying they've never had alcohol? If you had access to their social media accounts and texts, how many of those kids do you think have accidentally documented their illicit foray into drinking?

This clearly illustrates how relying upon traditional, clear cut crime data such as police reports does not give the full story when it comes to crime. Many voices and perspectives are being excluded from the narrative, and data points being excluded from the overall dataset. I do not want to give the impression that I am reducing people's personal experiences to numbers, but rather the opposite. People's personal experience, when compared with others, enhance people's ability to understand the world. 

### Big Picture

While it is easy to see that the way we view, report, and analyze crime data is flawed, what are the consequences? D'Ignazio and Klein again present an interesting facet of the criminal justice system to consider. They bring up risk assessment algorithims. In "Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach" from *Data Feminism*, they discuss said algorithms, saying,
> "The 'risk' in their name has to do with the likelihood of a person detained by the police committing a future crime. Risk assessment algorithms produce scores that influence whether a person is sent to jail or set free, effectively altering the course of their life" ([Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach](https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/ei7cogfn/release/2)).

In a world rife with inequality and half truths, the misrepresentation and exclusion of data has real world consequences. The bias present in the risk assessment algorithim can not only ruin lives, but do so disproportionately within historically misrepresented and oppressed groups. If we don't fully understand the driving forces behind crime, how do we expect to accurately convict people for it?

No matter what the crime and the situation, but especially for crimes that depend upon the identification of motive like murder, more data should always be welcome to identify trends, even if the methodology is new and unconventional. *American Murder: The Family Next Door* shows how introducing new data into a single case can lead to an easy and accurate conviction. So what would happen to criminology and the criminal justice system if these alternative forms of data were collated and analyzed? Let's look at the evidence from *American Murder: The Family Next Door*. Chris's behavior was immediately identified as suspect. While body language analysis can be considered akin to nonverbal pseudoscience, obviously people, including Chris's neighbor, solved the case just by looking at him. Solidifying the study of involuntary nonverbal cues could help investigators identify suspects on the scene or during interrogation. Shanann's text messages to her friend revealed her marriage was in trouble. Chris's texts, phone calls, and pictures corroborate Shanann's suspicions. If investigators had access to this information after her disappearance, Chris likely would have been arrested before he even had time to record his interviews. In retrospect, by looking at the textual data (sans crime scene footage) of what happened before Shanann and her daughters' disappearances, it almost feels like a disaster waiting to happen. Perhaps this is relying too much on hindsight, but couldn't data like this be used to identify trends in human behavior and motive? While it may not be able to predict crime (and I am in no way advocating for a surveillance-dependant police state, nor do I think Shanann could have realized that her husband would stoop to such desperate and evil measures), perhaps these unofficial kinds of data can be applied retroactively to learn what makes a criminal.

If *American Murder: The Family Next Door* creates an archive of a crime from start to finish, imagine the world if we compared every crime from start to finish. The only reason a crime goes unsolved is insufficient information. so what could a complete archive of data from crimes hurt? An archive of this kind and magnitude still wouldn't be enough to solve crime, but it could be instrumental in solving crimes.

### Controversy

Of course, releasing someone's deeply personal text messages and social media posts posthumously is controversial. It is difficult to imagine that Shanann ever expected for her dirty laundry to be aired to the entire world, and some people felt the need to defend Shanann's privacy. While this is completely valid, Shanann's family wanted this documentary made. It shows how every crime is full of signs, and if you know how to read them, it doesn't take Sherlock Holmes to identify the culprit. Ultimately, looking at this personal data (from both Shanann and Chris) brought justice for their two daughters (if one can call a jail sentence justice for infanticide). I'm also not saying that this kind of personal data should be made public, though I do think *American Murder: The Family Next Door* illustates how useful it can really be. Any archives created from this kind of data should be solely for the purpose of research, not exploitation and entertainment. I just think that these unofficial (non-police report) kinds of crime data are worth consideration and broader analysis. By compiling all the information/data, both official and unofficial, that we have about previously solved crimes and really taking a long hard look at the patterns, we just might learn something. 

### Sources
*American Murder: The Family Next Door*. Directed by Jenny Popplewell, Knickerbockerglory, 2020. *Netflix*, https://www.netflix.com/title/81130130?s=i&trkid=13747225

*Crime Data Explorer*. Federal Bureau of Investigation, https://crime-data-explorer.fr.cloud.gov/explorer/national/united-states/crime. Accessed 19 Oct. 2020, 

6\. The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves. (2020). In Data Feminism. Retrieved from https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/czq9dfs5

2\. Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach. (2020). In Data Feminism. Retrieved from https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/ei7cogfn
